---
layout: post
author: Amy Park
---
# API Documentation
Reliable and comprehensive API documentation serves as a vital reference library for developers working with software that lacks a user interface.

Graphical user interfaces (GUIs) are popular for a reason: they are intuitive and provide a sense of "place" where new users can learn by doing, often without needing to consult a knowledge base or documentation.

However, expert users with advanced technical skills often find it inefficient to rely solely on a page's layout and input fields for their common workflows.

Many products support these advanced use cases by providing API access to users with advanced permissions. This allows users to optimize their workflows by authenticating and accessing specific endpoints to perform common actions. For example, users can use an API endpoint to perform bulk updates to existing data, post new data, or fetch information 

Because these actions can be executed programmatically, fully supported API access offers a significant value proposition. This is a major selling point for enterprise-level SaaS subscriptions.

API documentation is a crucial part of this product offering. High-quality documentation increases the value for developer-users while keeping support costs low for the SaaS business.

Some software lacks a visual context entirely, making accessible documentation essential for users who are just learning the technology. Regardless of whether a tool has a visual interface, users depend on documentation to understand the available options, whether they are being taught, trained, or self-learning.

Clear documentation enables developer-users to be more efficient and self-reliant. When users succeed, their investment in the software is validated, leading to positive sentiment, renewed subscriptions, and mutual success. Additionally, documentation reduces support costs by using a 1-to-many communication model through a knowledge base

### Effective API Knowledge Bases:
- Have **higher standards** and requirements for version control than the average help documentation
- Are often found at a URL **distinct from** support troubleshooting and general feature docs.
- Contain thoroughly labeled references that are navigable alphabetically **and** categorized by topic 
- Include **thorough examples of successful responses**; example of error responses and context about what those errors mean
- Include **code samples in a variety of programming languages**, presented in an uncluttered way. Either through a carousel or some other common KB element.
- Do not include long-winded written content on pages intended as pure technical references. Readers should not have to scroll to find the key details they are searching for. Content can be easily found by a reader who is **scanning the page rather than reading sentences sequentially** to build up conceptual knowledge. 

The chosen knowledge tool and the organization's chosen documentation strategy also has an impact on the optimization of the knowledge base.

### Inpirations
- [Shopify Developer Docs](https://shopify.dev/docs)
- [Vitruvi Software Developer Docs](https://developers.vitruvi.cc/reference/list_labor_items)
- [Atlassian Developer Docs](https://developer.atlassian.com/)

**Why they are effective:**
- The knowledge is written for the audience's use-case
- The home page uses space efficiently and is responsive to different sizing
- There are 3 different ways to access the knowledge immediately available:
    - Clicking a card for common practices
    - Selecting an option from the nav menu
    - Using the search bar
    - Scrolling down to explore more entry points into the knowledge
- The content is separated into two common menu options; one being purely technical reference library organized alphabetically, and the other containing conceptual articles organized categorically.

## API Documentation strategy
- Assess the current health of the knowledge base and identify key areas of opportunity for rapid success (low effort + high value impact)
- Assess the statistics and data for user engagement on the knowledge base, topics, and individual documentation pages
- Evaluate the internal production cycle and set a documentation roadmap that matches the scale and velocity of the business.
- Establish or attend regular touchpoints with product managers and developers to understand the features under development and the implications of those developments on the software's API.
- Document, verify, and publish any changes or additions to the content.
- Establish or support a verification cadence to ensure no documents go stale due to inattention over time
- Provide regular communications of changes through established channels (active or passive updates)
- Set and monitor key performance indicators for the knowledge base and indivuals, tied to measurable outcomes.
- Adhere to a cadence of verification that helps us see at-a-glance how trustworthy the content is. 